Hey guys and girls! So, this video
is about making sure our game never gets stuck in a
boring loop. So firstly, I'm going to reset my Editor Layout to
Default, just so it's a little more familiar. And then, I'm going
to play the game, for a moment and see if I can get
it in a boring loop.
It didn't work there, let's try
again. What can happen,
and you could take a lot of play testing to get to it,
is that the game just goes up and down in some boring
loop, because there's no randomness with which the
ball bounces. So, it could just end up
conceivabley going up and down. It doesn't happen very often
but I've seen it happen often enough.
Of course, Sod's Law says it's not happening right
now. I mean even this is a bit boring, it's a bit.. Ooh! That
was a nice interesting bounce, but the rest of the time
it's... Here you go, this is the sort of thing.
OK, gravity is helping a little bit. It's because
of gravity scale,
it's actually helping a little bit to prevent it from being boring, but I think
what we want to do is make sure we can't get in a boring
verticle loop. In fact, we're already pretty much in a boring loop.
Here! Here you go! There's a chance that this will never
exit this loop; in this case, it actually is but you get the
idea. So, what we want to do is we want to make it
impossible for the system to get into a loop
that's dull. So, the way that we
do that is that we modify the ball's bounce,
every time it hits something. So, what
you do is you go into the Brick and on the colission
of the brick, you want to be thinking about
tweaking its velocity just a little bit,
every time... Sorry! The ball! On the colission of the Ball,
you want to be thinking about tweaking its velocity
every time it hits something. So, what we're going to do is
define a Vector2, which is just a system that stores two
numbers, and I'm going to call it tweak. And it's a
new Vector2, we have to construct a new one, and
it takes X and Y coordinates. We're going to tweak the X and
Y velocity a little bit. The question is, how much are we going to tweak it?
Well, I've had a play around with this, and it works out that about
0.2 in
both the X and the Y direction, works pretty
well. So, how do you get a random number between 0 and
0.2. Well, Random.Range
And then, you give it the minimum value, which
is going to be 0 float and 0
point 2 float. OK, so that's
your X value, and then, you need another
Random.Range
for your Y value, between 0 and 0.2.
So, what we're doing is we're giving a little bit
of random X and Y velocity. Of course, we've
done nothing yet, apart from creating a vector. Why don't
we just print this guy out, just for a second,
just so you can see what it is. It's not going to change any of the
behavior at all, but at least on the Console, we're going to be able to see
what's going on. So, I've got a bit of an error. What's going wrong?
F I need my floats in here, I think is the
problem. F for float. Yeah, that's
happier. OK, let's play it and see what happens.
So, what we're going to do is, just watch the Console as
we go. You see these numbers, logging into the Console. This
is the amount of random velocity, it would be adding.
0.2 X, 0.1 Y. 0.1 X,
0.1 Y, etc. It's all rounded in the Console.
So, let's go in and use that
now, it looks like it's a reasonable thing. When do we use it?
Well, let's do it immediately after we've played the audio. Now, how
would you do it? How would we change the velocity
of this ball? What will
we start typing? Well, have a think
about it. What part of the ball is it? What are we dealing with here?
And if you think about it, when you go into Unity,
it's the Rigid Body that's concerned with all
the physics. So, and it's an instance of a ball, and
an instance of a Rigid Body, so it'a a small R.  So, we start with a
rigidbody.velocity,
and if you're not sure, again, hit Command or Control + Apostrophe.
Look at Rigidbody.velocity in the docs, like
that. OK. So,
what are we going to do with it? Well, we're going to add. So, +=
tweak; Just try that, rigid.
ahh! [fumbles words] rigidbody.velocity
+= tweak; That's the same as saying
rigidbody.velocity = rigidbody.velocity + tweak; But
I don't want to write it twice. Cool! Let's go into
Unity and I'm just going to refocus on my
Play Space background, because
it's looking a little ugly right now. That's better! Now, let's
play. Now, what's the problem here? It's
complaining about something. Let's go back into
mono; I'm going to build in mono.
The call is ambiguous,
between the following method properties. Blah, blah, blah!
OK, so it doesn't, there's something here it
doesn't like. It doesn't like me adding this,
this tweak onto this
velocity here, and it's not entirely clear
why. It's probably because the
velocity is a 3D vector, on the
Rigid Body, even though we're in a 2D game, and we're trying to add a 2D
vector in here. So, it's saying it's ambiguous between the
following methods. So, what you can try here
is just changing Vector2 to Vector 3, and then, of
course when you do that you're going to have to say that, I don't want to change
the Z velocity. Let's try that.
And that has gotten rid of the ambiguities,
so start with the simplest Vector2. If the Compiler doesn't
like it, because it doesn't know how to add a Vector2 to a Vector3,
then just make it a 3 and add a 0 on the end. Let's try again!
[Game Sound Effects in Background]
Now, we're getting a lot
of errors here. There's not Rigid Body attached to the Ball Game
Object, but a script is trying to access it. Well, let's look at
the Ball Game Object. There is a Rigid Body, but the problem
here is that it's a Rigid Body 2D we
want to be using. OK, that's the problem! you need
to be very careful that you use the right type of Rigid Body.
In fact, given that we're using 2D now, we probably
can use a 2D Vector. So, a few deliberate
mistakes. I'm not going to cut them out, because sometimes it's good for you to see
me making mistakes live, they're the sort of things you'll do.
rigidbody2D.velocity OK now it should know it should know how
to add a 2D velocity to a 2D Rigid Body. Let's
try it. Let's clear the Console. I'm going to
just clear. OK.
Now, it's complaining here that we're giving this
Vector2 three arguments, so a Vector2
only takes two arguments. So, let's pop back to the editor,
and give it a try.
I'm going to just Maximize on Play for you, Game
Tab, Maximize on Play, and let's
see how much more interesting
the movement is. Now previously, this ball would just make its way left.
Ahh, you see it's already done something much more interesting, so
that's great! We can see that this velocity isn't
or at least isn't very often doing anything weird, but it
is making it move a little bit. Now, you might
ask, does this mean the ball is going to continually speed
up. Well yeah, quite possibly, we're adding
on average 0.1
World Units, World Units
per second, roughly meters per second of velocity, every
bounce then yes, the ball will be speeding up.
But as you can see, in a reasonable amount of time,
it's not speeding up an unreasonable amount, so
I think that's fine
and we're going to look at some automated play testing anyway, which will
test, kind of, the limits of that. So, well done getting that
far, and hopefully you understand that better. If you want to know
more about Random.Range, just go to Unity's docs
in the scripting API, just type in Random.Range,
as another way of finding answers. Have a look at the doc.
It's a static on random, it
returns a float. It takes in two floats, a minimum
and a maximum and gives you a pseudo random number, in between
them. You can also do it with integers here. You can say,
int, minimum, maximum. OK! So, it
has two signatures. These docs can be a bit hard to read,
there should be a big bold line above this static range here,
because it's a completely different almost documentation. You've got
one signature here, from static float down,
and then, one more from static int range,
down for the integer version. But that's Random.
Range, really useful for introducing more humanity,
if you like, into your games, and yeah, may the
boring loops be gone!